[MUSIC]
>> Ben Callahan: I wanna walk you guys
through a few things that I feel like
[COUGH], some mistakes that I've made,
and a little bit of, I don't know,
a bit of experience that I've had that I
feel like I need to kind of be sharing
with people as I talk about
some of these things.
I get asked all the time,
how do you price this work?
What does a responsive website cost?
And the answer to that is as ambiguous
as what does a website cost, right?
I mean, it depends on how much
time it takes [LAUGH] in my world.
And so what I've tried to do is,
we're very diligent about
tracking our effort on projects.
We track every hour that
we spend on a project.
And so what I've been able to do is
kind of look back at those numbers,
compare those to similar projects that
were not responsive projects, and
start to see what kinds of increases
we're seeing or decreases are we seeing.
And these numbers are always changing.
I'm not gonna give you dollar figures,
I'm gonna give you a percentage increases,
okay?
The other thing that's
important about some of this is
you need to make sure that you're
comparing apples to apples.
So your process, you can't take a process
where you don't have content discovery and
you don't do any of those kinds of
planning deliverables like we talked
about, and then do all of those things and
compare them to that dissimilar process.
So you need to make sure that
you're kind of thinking about
what have you added on top of
what your standard process was.
We've seen our first couple
sites as much as double
in terms of the amount of
effort it took for us.
But this was us kind of reaching
blindly in the dark [LAUGH],
not really understanding what was going
on, trying to figure these things out.
And then, quickly thereafter,
we got down to just 50% more.
And we're starting to kind of
settle at around 25% more time is
about what it takes us to do this.
Now, interestingly enough,
sorry, go ahead.
>> Speaker 2: I just wanna know,
when you say soon after,
how long do you think it takes?
>> Ben Callahan: After a couple sites,
a couple sites, so two or three sites in,
we saw that 100% drop significantly.
It's like we just figured
a couple things out [LAUGH]
that we didn't have to go back and
rework, and go back and rework as much.
So that was very quick,
the 25% more was sort of a longer period.
I mean, you can imagine what this
chart looks like, it's that long tail.
And I don't know that we'll ever get to
what it was before, but I am seeing now
that the changes, the small changes,
we're making in our process,
things like doing a style prototype first
instead of a full comp in Photoshop.
Things like that are having impact on
the amount of time that it takes us to
do this stuff.
And we're getting closer and closer to the
same amount of time it used to take us.
I don't know if it'll ever be less.
I can't see that happening,
but we're getting it down.
We're starting to figure
some of these things out.
And it's important, too,
to note that content
driven sites where a lot of these patterns
have kind of emerged and we're starting to
see some really good solutions, are a bit
different than working on an app.
More complex interactions that
you have to make work and
rethink components at smaller resolutions.
You could spend lots of time,
lots more time,
trying to think through
some of those things.
>> Speaker 3: Did you find that
your sites end up being simpler?
>> Ben Callahan: Do you mean
because we're doing responsive?
>> Speaker 3: Yeah.
>> Ben Callahan: I've found that we
ask a lot of those questions up front.
Some are sort of this mobile first
mentality saying, hey, you're telling me
that you don't think that functionality
is needed at small screens?
Well, why is it needed on larger screens?
We're not afraid to have
those conversations, but,
no, we try not to dumb them down,
if that's what you mean.
We try to still have a site that's very
usable and that meets sort of what
people would expect to see in top tier
web design at high resolutions, as well.
And just trying to take those things and
shift the interaction models enough to
work well on touch at smaller resolutions.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: Do you think the maintenance
going forward becomes more or
less with a responsive website?
>> Ben Callahan: Well, there's more CSS,
so there's more maintenance costs there.
Now, is it exponentially more?
I don't think so.
At Sparkbox we try to also offer
training when we do this stuff.
I don't know how you guys have done this,
we've always done this with our websites.
But what we do now is we
offer a level of sort of
responsive training to their dev
team if they're gonna maintain it.
So we'll come in and do a little bit
of consulting, help them prototype it,
build and write some production code.
And then come behind with a little
bit of a training where we can
sit down with their primary designers and
developers and talk through some
of these process changes and some of
the techniques we used to do this stuff.
Those kinds of things go a long
way in helping maintain.
And a lot of times it's like
teaching them how to use SAS.
They've never used some of those tools
before, but they do go a long way.
The kinds of things that
are increasing this are things like
project management costs.
It's more PM time to do this.
I feel that I'm constantly sort
of interacting with my client
to make sure they're coming
alongside this different process.
[COUGH]
There's fewer patterns out there.
We've built websites for a long time,
but we've only been doing this stuff for
a couple years.
There isn't the same volume of solutions,
ready to use solutions,
out there like there are for
other kinds of web design.
It's more code, so
it takes more time coding.
And testing,
we spend a lot of time testing.
I mean, you can imagine [LAUGH].
No longer are we sort of limited
to a handful of desktop browsers.
Now we're trying to build something
that works on all those browsers at any
viewport width, and
on all of these devices that
have multiple browsers on them.
So this just exponentially
increases the testing.
We're gonna talk about testing as well.
The other thing to keep in mind
when you're comparing pricing is
if I tell you that it's gonna cost, say,
50% more to build a responsive site than
a fixed width site, you've got to
understand is the value you're getting for
that is significantly greater, too.
The real comparison would be
build me a fixed width site and
a mobile specific site and compare that
price to a responsive site, right.
When clients start asking those
kinds of questions, that's a good
conversation to have, say, well, you have
to have a solution for mobile, right.
I mean, we've seen this growth chart,
you've got to do something.
You're rebuilding or redesigning now,
you need to be thinking about mobile.
How do you want to approach it?
Mobile specific, responsive?
And when you start to look at those
numbers, the percentages are not higher,
they're lower.
At least that's what we're seeing.
Plus maintenance,
now I'm maintaining a single code line.
So there's some real robust
selling points, I guess,
is what you might call them.
Questions on pricing?
Those of you who said you had built sites,
are you seeing that same kind of range or
are you seeing anything different?
>> Speaker 5: My experience
is having each page
as its own responsive kind of solution.
Each page has a different
set of solutions.
So the designer delivered a mobile comp,
and
a desktop comp, and
there's not the same type of grids.
So it's kind of like looking,
well, coming up with
an intuitive way to make this
responsive and fill in the gaps.
And then each page ends up becoming
its own solution where there's
different ways that you
have to switch images.
I found that to be the most taxing, and
I'd say as much as double to
triple the amount of work.
>> Ben Callahan: Okay.
>> Speaker 5: Because each page was coming
up with its own solution versus how
do you take the mobile version and
fill in all the gaps, tablet and all these
different sizes of tablets all the way to
desktop, and make it look really good for
all these different screen sizes.
To me it felt like way, way more work.
But, I mean, yeah,
I'm getting a lot better at it now, and so
it's less and less.
As it gets Integrated into
your process ahead of time and
your psyche and
you're just kind of used a flexible model,
it gets a lot easier because you're
asking the hard questions upfront.
But I would say the first few
sites it was like double or
triple because each page warranted
its own set of midi queries.
It wasn't like there was a common template
across lots of different settings.
>> Ben Callahan: Yeah, I mean when we
started doing sites, we picked our own
site first so we made a lot of mistakes
on ourselves, which I'm okay with.
And so we did that and it took us forever.
And then we did a site for a client,
they didn't even ask for responsive.
We just said, you know what,
we believe in this enough,
we think it's going to change the industry
enough, that we're just going to do it.
And we still met all of the needs that
they had at their larger resolutions,
we just delivered a lot more than that.
The pricing was about 125% of
what I would have charged them.
And we probably spent 175% of the time,
so we lost a little bit on the job.
But that was a no-brainer for me.
My team is learning a new skill set,
of course we're gonna lose
a little bit on the first few.
And I think that's kind of what it takes.
You kind of gotta step out a little
bit and you've gotta do it.
If you're internal in a company somewhere,
I'm not telling you to ask for
forgiveness as opposed to permission.
But, I mean, start to use percentages and
components, and
then fix the width of the container.
Just get a little bit of practice
thinking about that flexibility.
And then later when your manager says hey,
you know what, I read about responsive web
design, we should be doing that,
you can say, yeah, check this out.
Boom, one little change, and
all of a sudden things are flexing.
I mean, those are the kinds of things
that I think we need to be doing.
We never fix widths of things anymore.
Even if it's a fixed width element in
some weird way that we're building,
it's percentage based with
a wrapper that locks it down, so
that in the future we can open that up,
we can set it free [LAUGH].
>> Speaker 5: And
then you mentioned patterns,
that you showed responsive to Brad Frost.
>> Ben Callahan: Yeah,
I haven't shown that.
Brad has a huge repository just full
of all kinds of different patterns.
I can't remember the URL, but
you just search for Brad Frost patterns.
And he's Brad_Frost on Twitter, tons and
tons and tons of great content.
This guy is just incredibly prolific.
He's in Pittsburgh, he works for
RGA, really nice guy.
And BradFrostWeb.com is his site.
Just always generating content about
this stuff, a really forward thinker.
>> Speaker 5: And stuff like that,
the pattern library and
also migrating to mobile first,
I feel like has really reduced the cost,
so it's getting closer.
>> Ben Callahan: Yes.
>> Speaker 5: But, I mean,
like you said on your own first
site it was probably three times.
>> Ben Callahan: Yes.
>> Speaker 5: So, I agree with that,
you kinda have to go through that.
>> Ben Callahan: Yeah.
>> Speaker 5: Those growing pains.
>> Ben Callahan: Yeah, you definitely do.
Other questions or thoughts on this?
>> Ben Callahan: Okay.